English Proficiency Scoring Rubric for English Language Learners

HOLISTIC
ANALYTIC

Overall 
Cohesion 
Syntax 
Vocabulary 
Phraseology 
Grammar 
Conventions
5
Native-like facility in the use of language with 
syntactic variety, 
Appropriate word choice and phrases; well-controlled text organization; precise use of 
grammar and conventions; rare language inaccuracies that do not impede 
communication. 
Text organization 
consistently well 
controlled using a 
variety of effective linguistic features such as reference and 
transitional words and phrases to connect ideas across sentences and paragraphs; appropriate overlap of ideas.
Flexible and effective use of a full range of syntactic structures including simple, 
compound, and 
complex sentences; There may be rare minor and negligible errors in sentence 
formation.
Wide range of 
vocabulary flexibly and effectively used to convey precise meanings; skillful use of topic-related terms and less common words; rare negligible inaccuracies in word use. 
Flexible and 
effective use of a variety of phrases, such as idioms, 
collocations, and lexical bundles, to convey precise and subtle meanings; rare minor 
inaccuracies that are negligible.
Command of grammar and usage with few or no errors.
Consistent use of appropriate 
conventions to 
convey 
meaning; spelling, capitalization, and punctuation errors nonexistent or 
negligible.
4
Facility in the use of 
language with syntactic variety and range of words and phrases; controlled organization; accuracy in grammar and conventions; occasional language 
inaccuracies that rarely impede communication. 
Organization generally well controlled; a range of cohesive devices used appropriately such as reference and 
transitional words and phrases to connect 
ideas; generally 
appropriate overlap of ideas
Appropriate use of a variety of syntactic structures, such as simple, compound, and complex 
sentences; occasional errors or 
inappropriateness in sentence formation. 
Sufficient range of vocabulary to allow flexibility and 
precision; appropriate use of topic-related terms and less 
common lexical items
Appropriate use of a variety of phrases, such as idioms, 
collocations, and lexical bundles; 
occasional 
inaccuracies and colloquialisms. 
Minimal errors in grammar and usage.
Generally consistent use of appropriate conventions to 
convey meaning; 
spelling, capitalizatio n, and punctuation errors few and not distracting.
3
Facility limited to the use of common structures and generic vocabulary; 
organization generally controlled although 
connection sometimes absent or unsuccessful; errors in grammar and syntax and usage. 
Communication is impeded by language inaccuracies in some cases.
Organization generally controlled; cohesive devices used but limited in type; Some 
repetitive, mechanical, or faulty use of 
cohesion use within and/or between 
sentences and 
paragraphs.
Simple, compound, and complex syntactic structures present 
although the range may be limited; some apparent errors in 
sentence formation, especially in more complex sentences. 
Minimally adequate range of vocabulary for the topic; no 
precise use of subtle word 
meanings; topic 
related terms only used occasionally; attempts to use less common vocabulary but with some 
inaccuracy
Evident use of 
phrases such as 
idioms, collocations, and lexical bundles but without much variety; some 
noticeable 
repetitions and 
misuses. 
Some errors in grammar and usage.
Developing use of conventions to 
convey 
meaning; errors in spelling, 
capitalization, and punctuation that are sometimes 
distracting.
2
Inconsistent facility in sentence formation, word choice, and mechanics; organization partially 
developed but may be 
missing or unsuccessful. Communication impeded in many instances by language inaccuracies. 
Organization only 
partially developed with a lack of logical 
sequencing of ideas; some basic cohesive devices used but with inaccuracy or repetition. 
Some sentence 
variation used; many sentence structure 
problems.
Narrow range of 
vocabulary to convey basic and elementary meaning; topic 
related 
terms used inappropri ately; errors in word formation and word choice that may 
distort meanings
Narrow range of phrases, such as 
collocations and lexical bundles, used to convey basic and elementary 
meaning; many 
repetitions and /or misuses of phrases. 
Many errors in grammar and usage.
Variable use of 
conventions; spelling, capitalization, and punctuation errors frequent and 
distracting.
1
A limited range of familiar words or phrases loosely strung together; frequent errors in grammar 
(including syntax) and usage. Communication impeded in most cases by language inaccuracies. 
No clear control of organization; cohesive devices not present or unsuccessfully used; presentation of 
ideas unclear.
Pervasive and basic errors in sentence 
structure and word order that cause 
confusion; basic 
sentences errors 
common.
Limited vocabulary often inappropriately used; limited control of word choice and word 
forms; little attempt to use topic-related terms
Memorized chunks of language, or 
simple phrasal 
patterns 
predominate; many repetitions and 
misuses of phrases. 
Errors in 
grammar and usage 
throughout.
Minimal use of 
conventions; 
spelling, capitalizatio n, and punctuation errors throughout.

Key Terms and Definitions 
Phrase: Multiple word units 
Grammar: The rules by which words change their forms, including the use of word classes and grammatical morphology in English. Word classes include prepositions, pronouns, nouns, verbs, etc… Grammatical morphology includes third person, plural, possessive, etc… 
Syntax: Structuring sentences according to syntactic rules related to coordinating clauses, developing syntactic phrases (noun, verb, preposition phrases), phrasal and clausal dependency, and transformations such as passives, relative clauses, and negations. 
Cohesive device: Cohesive devices are used as links between two or more items (e.g., words, phrases, clauses) in a text to enhance text cohesion. These include the use of conjunctions (and, but, if, on the other hand), transitions (first, next, finally, for example), repetition of words, phrases, and ideas across sentences and paragraphs, and the use of anaphor (pronouns replacing nouns). 
Simple, complex, and compound sentences 
 -Simple: Independent clause 
 -Complex: Independent and dependent clauses 
 -Compound: Two of more independent clauses 
Chunks: Multiple words that combine to have a single meaning. Often memorized without knowing what the individual words mean (e.g., “How are you” for “Hello”) 
Lexical bundles: Multiple word units that are common in English but are not idiomatic (“There is”). More common than collocations Collocations: Two or more words that are often used together (e.g., save time, go to bed, fast food) 
Idioms: multi-word unit where meaning not deducible from those of the individual words (kick the bucket, rain cats and dogs)
